hi I'm Steve Clemens and I have a
question if the Palestinian Authority
has largely been a spectator during the
Israeli War on Gaza what will its future
be after the war let's get to the bottom
line US President Joe Biden wants to see
a revitalized Palestinian Authority to
take charge in Gaza once the war is over
the only catch is that Israel has killed
and injured tens of thousands of
Palestinians there in the past few weeks
and basically flattened the entire Gaza
Strip making normal civilian life
impossible the other catch is that the
Palestinian Authority which co-manages
civilian life with the Israeli military
in the West Bank is just not popular
there either and wait there may be two
more problems one no one's asking the
Palestinians what they want and two the
Israeli government has already said it
doesn't like Joe Biden's ideas so where
does that leave America's plans and is
the Palestinian Authority stop stuck in
a catch22 situation where its efforts
are undermined before they even begin
today we're talking with the former
prime minister and Finance Minister of
the Palestinian Authority Salam fiad who
is now a visiting scholar at Princeton
University Salam thank you so much for
joining us and obviously this is a grim
subject it's tough to discuss while a
war is underway to be talking about what
happens the day after but you initiated
that discussion with an important
article in foreign affairs where you
said that there are things that need to
be done the and and and you look at the
Palestinian Authority and the PLO can
you share with our audience what you
think the building blocks are of a
sensible future on the Palestinian side
well thank you much for having you on
your
program uh I decided to actually go out
with this article against the backdrop
of beginning to hear some background
conversations and and noise about So-Cal
the after when when the war was really
in full swing uh exactic very high toall
in terms of the unprecedented indeed
loss of human life destruction and all
but what struck me the most was uh some
thinking that the day after was going to
be characterized by a system in which
Hamas had no existence which was
consistent I guess with the objective
that the government of Israel set out
for itself when it actually launched
this this war uh after uh October 7 uh
to me uh actually that was a nonstarter
and and because everybody knew at the
time and Israel was called on it that
that goal was impossible to attain Hamas
is an ideology is a political movement
with an ideology and ideas and you
cannot destroy a political movement
subsequent to that some other goals were
mentioned little bit of the scaling back
of that nevertheless what still what we
still have to this day ranges from the
impossible to the highly unattainable so
to me that conversation really actually
meant that tens of thousands superan
lives would perish before we got to that
day if ever and that was not really
going to happen for for certain and and
so I decided against backdrop of that to
really uh put forward a vision you know
just like my own ideas about what what
what could and should happen Gaza after
all is integral part of the territories
that are occupied in 1967 originally
covered by the perview of the person
Authority now uh consistent with that
motive that I have just like underlined
it was I I decided to really start that
conversation by pointing to what should
not be considered first I said no
Arrangement that contemplates
subjugating the Palestinians imposing an
arrangement of them after subjugating
them should be considered that should be
really out of consideration altogether
and by that I was referring to
background noise about some transitional
arrangement in Gaza involving some
people from there dealing with the
International Community and all again
assuming that Hamas is is outside of the
scene completely what I had in mind at
the time was the thinking that the PA
would not want to really be seen as
coming into Gaza on the back of an
Israeli tank as is often said but even
if it were willing to do it uh I I said
it is not in a position to do it and by
that I really meant the political
weakness the PA was in and that really
actually as a segue into a conversation
as to what needed to happen in order to
provide the political enablement to the
P authority to be able to assume that
massive responsibility that's the
background and that's how I really got
into this and and to really get into it
basically I said what needs to happen is
first of all to really deal with the key
reason as to why it is is that the
palestin authority found itself after
three decades of Peace processing in
such a terrible shape politically
speaking so weak so Fe with not much
standing with the public with
Palestinian public whether in the
territories over which it should have
perview or even amongst Palestinians
throughout the work as fact and that key
reason was the failure of the bet that
the pl took back in
1993 on the oso peace process delivering
on promise of statud for the
Palestinians it has been many years now
since most everybody came to has come to
the conclusion that that promise was
never going to really be fulfilled
definitely not on the path where we
Palestinians had found ourselves in the
aftermath and in in the course of that
process so that was the key contributor
to that weakness and much the same as
has contributed to the standing of the
PLO itself what happened concomittant
with that was the PLO has lost much of
its representational capacity that's
really the the the problem as I saw it
and I have seen it for many many years
with the fail of oo the pr no longer
really represented the consensus view
amongst Palestinians in the way it did
over the fiveyear period between 1988
and
1993 that consensus that you know
virtually complete National consensus
fractured for sure upon the signing of
the o
with the passage of time and the failure
of also to deliver on the promise of
personal
stat you know the P basically lost more
and more of that representation capacity
what needed to happen was to expand the
PLO in order to include in its strengths
all Palestinian factions including those
that beg to differ with Os from the very
beginning especially Hamas Islamic jaab
and all other political forces and by
the way ham and Islamic Jad were were
not the only naysayers when it came to
Oso there are some factions within the
PLO itself that actually back to Del you
know back to differ from beginning
nevertheless over time you know the base
of descent away from oo expanded
progressively so what we're looking at
today is a shell of what the PLO used to
be I'm not really saying this with joy
actually I'm really saying of
realization that we have to do
everything we possibly can to preserve
the hard one gain of having a home for
us all Palestinians which at one point
actually meant something to say the so
legitimate representative ofan people
but how much of that really continues to
stand to this day there are some who
react I said by saying you know how can
you even be saying all all of these
things I said I say it because I care if
it if this is to be what it says it is
this all legi representative pan people
it has to be expanded to include all
points of view it has to be that tent
that National tent that home for
everybody including Hamas and Jihad that
that was the basic idea that I had in
mind which would actually in my view
provide the political enablement to the
Palestinian Authority because the
Palestinian Authority is essentially an
extension of the P so it's a remarkable
provocation because what you're arguing
is the Palestinian Authority as is now
is broken and there's no hope of
Reviving this broken uh Authority in
current form and so to re-anchor
legitimacy bringing all of the parties
back into the PLO including the one that
Israel is at war with uh including the
one uh where much of the West says can
never be in the government you're
arguing that in that Patchwork of
perspectives Hamas has to be in there am
I getting that right you're getting it
absolutely right and that's been my view
for many years now it's obvious the P
law has lost much of its
representational power I mean look at
basically PS what people say about what
it is that they expect and how they
really feel about that so-called peace
process vast majority of Palestinians
you know for long have you know left
that station and so our representational
body home if you will for it to actually
represent us all all all points of view
and all of that sort of thing definitely
has to be expanded to reflect all those
points of views and and naturally
continue to be what it was uh when when
in fact it entered into oo agreements
back in 1993 it's obvious I mean that is
something that really needs to happen
now why is that a source of enablement
and let me be very clear what I really
had in mind when I said the VA as it
exists today is unable to assume that
responsibility even if it were willing
to do it I had in mind the political
weakness the legitimacy the
acceptability if you will I did not have
in mind you know technical capacity
administrative capacity which might be
actually ganed from statements made by
American officials us officials and
others Now using terms like um
revitalized PA surely there is a lot of
revitalization that's that's required
anyone would tell you that this in part
the weak standing of the pl reflects
case of chronic misrule so there's no
question that that has to be fixed the
the Palestinian Authority's capacity to
govern must be enhanced and strengthened
and it must govern in you know in full
Accord with the precepts of good
governance that's obvious but that's not
what I had in mind the priority now is
for political must be and the focus must
be squarely on political enablement
because how else is a Palestinian
Authority government which in my
construction needs to be consented to by
the expanded PL which includes all
factions and political forces is how in
God's name is that government going to
show up the quote unquote in the day
after which of course when it comes it
will not have come a day too soon for
the tens of thousands of people who have
been killed or or injured or or the very
vast majority who have been displaced uh
not to mention the the massive
destruction that Israel has reigned on
Gaza Strip since October 7 so how in
God's name is a government like that
going to show up the after begin to
assume that responsibility unless it is
a product of a national consensus that's
thats to
be absolutely essential because minus
that it just simply would not have the
legitimacy I want to ask you about Jake
Sullivan the president's National
Security advisor President Biden's
National Security adviser you know
meeting uh uh with mmud abas trying to
indicate that that the United States is
hoping the Palestinian Authority can
clean up its act can deal with
corruption can bring in young leaders
what I'm hearing from you is that is a
false Choice am I am I hearing that
right that's not really the focus of my
proposal the focus of my proposal is
political empowerment and enablement
right imparting legitimacy uh and and
you know making the PLO what it is what
it should be what it was and it needs to
be again you know our so legitimate
representative you know that's
absolutely important and that is really
what would Prov
the legitimacy that's needed and the
political enablement that's required I'm
not really saying the PA needs to fix it
I just have really actually mentioned
that but is that the reason why we
really should be doing what we're doing
and is it really the case that it's just
now that it has become that the PA has
not really offered the best governance
model in the world that's really not
that's not what the force of
conversation ought to be the focus of
conversation ought to be on answering
the question of what it is it might take
the Palestinian Authority which would be
a logical Choice the most logical choice
to assume responsibility for managing
the Affairs of Palestinian people in
Gaza stri exactly as it is responsible
managing the Affairs of Palestinian
people in the West Bank is it not
incumbent on us Palestinians to say here
we are we ready to really actually
assume that responsibility through a
reconfigured and and re empowered and
politically enabled you know Palestinian
Authority to assume that responsibility
then this whole conversation about who's
going to do be doing what and the day
after would with vanish and Israel would
no longer continue to hide behind you
know such such statement as we we don't
want to really turn this into this that
or the other thing that it will add to
the instruments of pressure on the
government of Israel to stop this war of
aggression that by the way has to be our
overriding priority right now all of
these other conversations can wait you
know revitalization re invigoration all
of that kind of stuff can wait what is
required now is political empowerment
and enablement of personal authority to
assume that responsibility today before
tomorrow and by the way that is
imminently doable doable and with with
with great speed the pl has convened
several meetings I mean as of of
secretary generals of various factions
the most recent of which took place in
Al in July of this year and what
happened then what happened then was
actually a statement read out by
president abas that basically said the
conferees had agreed to form a follow-up
committee to follow up on that which
they agreed to follow up on before we
don't need that what we really need is
for such Mee to take place even if
virtually for them to say no conditions
on anybody this is open for anyone
regardless of their political
orientation or political ideology or
program Hamas and Jad are welcome to
join immediately no one has conditions
on anyone it's open for everybody what
I'm really talking about is a forum that
is actually the home of a multivision
platform right where you know different
Visions can coexist at the same time but
that's what pluralism is about Mr Salam
let me ask you a question about the the
composite of the PLO now Hussein Shake
as I understand the Secretary General of
the PLO is reticent about Hamas coming
uh into that has commented uh to Jake
Sullivan that their violent tactics
disqualify them so I'm interested in the
tectonics of how this might come about
do you think the PLO will accept what
you saying it needs to do to reorient
the legitimacy of the Palestinian
people you know the pr definitely has a
choice to make uh if if the
pr chooses to continue to basically say
unless to the factions including Hamas
unless you you agree with our platform
you cannot join well then it's going to
really have to wait a very long period
of time because before these factions
would decide to
join we asked the question and that's
what really people are wondering about
is that really a logical expectation is
it a logical expectation for membership
in the PLO for various parties and
factions Palestinian on the Palestinian
side to agree to all that the P had
signed in you know to back 1993 when
three decades later everybody knows that
that process was not going to really
take us anywhere it's not any longer it
cannot it's impossible so the you know
whereas there may have been some logic
to that back in the 90s you know unless
you subscribe to this Vision that really
brought us here that produced the PA
where is that logic of continuing to
expect that to be a demand or
expectations of the Palestinians when in
fact the conceptual equ equivalent of
that was never expected of any
government in Israel how logical is it
for the PLO to continue to insist on
that expectation of Hamas Jad and others
maybe even the pflp how logical is it
for for to continue to insist on that as
a a ticket for membership when in Israel
there is a government and it's not
really only smotrich and bf and all of
that Natan himself for many many many
years yesterday he was bragging about
being the guy who really actually
destroyed Oso the Nan himself repeatedly
for anyone who wanted to listen
repeatedly said there's not going to be
any sovereignty in the territory on the
Territory between River Jordan and
Mediterranean but for Israel he many
times said that where is the palan state
in this so when that expectation is
placed on Hamas and others who would
want to join but for the platform of the
PLO you know this would make it totally
illogical if not really out irr
responsible so the PO has a choice to
make here and it's obvious which way it
should go that position is much better
presented to the World by a United
Palestinian politic it's not good enough
for that to be presented by the PLO
because P right now doesn't present it
this way right and it's not good for
Hamas alone to present it this way or
Jihad or you know those who oppos it is
best for us United to present the world
with this Vision I am absolutely
the world would deal with us that's
that's that's my point what I'm hearing
from you Salam is is fascinating because
you're not asking permission from Israel
or the US you're saying this is what
Palestinians and the PLO can do to
restore the legitimacy of a movement
across the public and if Israel wants to
play great if Israel doesn't want to
play you're going to continue to proceed
so I am interested in a couple of things
one is how do you think Israel will
respond to a PLO with a restored
legitimacy what do you think the United
States which you identify as one of the
most powerful actors in this should be
doing with regard to a restored PLO that
basically expels the Palestinian
Authority uses it if it can discards it
if it's
irrelevant see it's been always my
approach to think about what it is that
is in our best interest as Palestinians
to begin the iation by what suits Israel
is definitely the wrong foot to enter
this room or what the world would find
acceptable not acceptable we we know
that that's really not the right way to
go there is no national movement that
really seeks Liberation as ours you know
has been and continues to do to do that
really actually starts conversation on
the basis of of what it it its enemy
desires to see that just really is the
wrong point of entry so to me there is
no other solution to the current impa to
the current challenge that we Face the
fracture in our body politic we need we
need to repair that as soon as possible
and and that actually the stoppage of
the war I see is actually contingent on
our capacity to accomplish that
objective the sooner we put ourselves in
a position to go to the and say here we
are united in this position it is my
beted and this is not really something
that I constructed in the abstract based
on many many conversations I've had over
the years now with many who would not
really want to hear the word ham jiad
resistance or any of that who actually
in recent years have been telling me
you've been telling us these stories for
a long period of time are we getting in
your way meaning it really is up to us
and honestly I believe if we are united
look I mean Israel was not very fond
let's just remember remember Israel
itself was not very fond of dealing with
the PLO and anybody who knows anything
about our history knows that Israel did
everything humanly possible to avoid
dealing with the PLO and and try to look
for all kinds of formulas up until it
really decided there is no other way but
to really actually try to reach
accommodation with the PLO and that's
what it decided to really do this when
when they decided to really enter into
this transaction arrangement with the
PLO they decided because they really
felt that they they had no choice what
we really need to do is to answer the
simple question how is it that we can go
about uniting our politic in a way that
makes it possible to go the world and
say this is who we are this is what we
really want to accomplish and this is
how we really want to go about it my bet
is that the world would deal with the
United Palestinian politic if we
continue to project ourselves as you
know a component here another there uh I
am I'm I'm afraid that Israel as well as
others will be explo in the differences
and medling in our own Internal Affairs
when our own Internal Affairs are really
our own
business there is no other way there is
no logic to continue to exclude you know
these other factions including Hamas and
Jad and there is no logic for Hamas or
Jihad to continue to not really actually
forcefully seek to join the pl tomorrow
on no conditions no one has any
conditions on anyone and you know this
has even I have not really said the
thing except in passing about all we
have to do is just look at where Israel
is you know it is been my view that the
center of gravity of Israeli body
politic was never accepting of the idea
of a fully Sovereign Palestinian State
on the territory Israel occupied in 1967
especially in new well we'll have to
leave it there fascinating conversation
former Palestinian prime minister Salam
fiad thank you so much for joining us
today thank you Steve very much for
having me appreciate it so what's the
bottom line listen more than 90
Palestinian journalists the only
journalists on the ground in Gaza for
the most part have been killed by
Israeli forces in the past 73 days that
means more than one journalist killed on
average per day one of the latest of
these is Al jazer cameraman SAR Abu Daka
who along with Gaza Chief correspondent
W ddu was fired on by an Israeli drone
at an elementary school that had already
been destroyed earlier in the day they
were trying to bring us the story of
what's Happening Sumer bled for hours
and Medics who tried to reach him were
not allowed to get close yel was injured
but survived if you'll remember most of
his family was killed by Israeli forces
earlier in the war if media who wear
bright signs indicating they are media
are targeted all are clearly targeted
and this is what the world is watching
right now thankfully the world has
Fearless people who are literally
risking it all to tell us what's
happening and that's the bottom
line
[Music]